Quality Assurance Pipeline (#13)
stjudecloud/rfcs: text/0002-quality-check-workflow.md

# Table of Contents <!-- omit in toc -->

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
- [Discussion](#discussion)
- [Specification](#specification)
- [Items Still In-Progress](#items-still-in-progress)
- [Outstanding Questions](#outstanding-questions)

## Introduction

This RFC documents an automated workflow for assessing the integrity and quality of St. Jude Cloud genomics data. The goal of this RFC is two-fold.

1. Establish state of the art method for comprehensively evaluating genomics data quality at scale: both at time of receipt and after processing.
2. Publish a collection of metrics that end-users of St. Jude Cloud can leverage to assess the quality of the data available. This context should save users time computing the information themselves while also informing appropriate use of the data.

You can find the relevant discussion on the [associated pull request](https://github.com/stjudecloud/rfcs/pull/3).

## Motivation

> St. Jude Cloud is one of the largest repositories of omics data available for request to date. As such, the project processes thousands of samples from whole-genome, whole-exome, RNA-seq, and various omics-based assays each year. A standard, robust method to assess pre-processing and post-processing quality for samples has been developed in-house, but there are some shortcomings with our current approach. In particular, this RFC will attempt to

Reviewer: I don't think we hyphenate whole genome or whole exome elsewhere. So we should be consistent.

- identify and implement key metrics that can be automated to assist in manual observation of the data, and
- publish these results alongside the data already published in St. Jude Cloud so that end-users can similar view results.

## Discussion

### Types of QC

There are (at least) two different types of QC typically carried out omics-based data. **Experiment** QC attempts to identify the success of the assay(s) performed. Once one is sufficiently satisfied that the data generated by an experiment is "good" (by some definition of that word), **computational** QC examines the degree to which computational processing of that data was completed successfully.

By the time data reaches the St. Jude Cloud team from various sources, extensive _experimental_ and _computational_ evaluation have already been carried out. Each contributing project has its own thresholds for quality in both areas which is dependent on the best practices at that point in time and the goals of the project. Most often, we take the computational data, revert it back to its raw form (such as FastQ files), and reprocess it using our harmonization pipeline.

> Thus, the scope of this RFC, and the QC of samples on the project in general, is limited to the _computational_ QC of the files produce for publication in St. Jude Cloud. While we do produce results that define _experimental_ results (such as `fastqc` ), these are rarely used to decide which files pass or fail our QC. We hope that the inclusion of these results will save end-users time and aide in decision-making about downstream analysis approaches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus, the scope of this RFC, and the QC of samples on the project in general, is limited to the _computational_ QC of the files produced for publication in St. Jude Cloud. While we do produce results that define _experimental_ results (such as `fastqc` ), these are rarely used to decide which files pass or fail our QC. We hope that the inclusion of these results will save end-users time and aide in decision-making about downstream analysis approaches.
```

### Tools and Metrics

> Here, we outline each tool, what metrics are considered in an automated manner, and which metrics and require manual inspect. To keep from duplicating information and to ensure the RFC doesn't get out of sync, versions for each tool can be found in the [dependencies](#dependencies) section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, we outline each tool, what metrics are considered in an automated manner, and which metrics require manual inspection. To keep from duplicating information and to ensure the RFC does not get out of sync, versions for each tool can be found in the [dependencies](#dependencies) section.
```

#### ngsderive

`ngsderive` is an in-house tool developed to backwards derive useful information from omics data. In this RFC, `ngsderive` is used to guess which instrument was used to sequence the data, the original read length (pre-read trimming), and RNA-seq strandedness. Please see [the repository](https://github.com/claymcleod/ngsderive/) for more information.

In the QC pipeline, we leverage all currently available subcommands to try to determine read length, instrument, and strandedness (if RNA-seq).

| Name                  | Experiments | Check  | Description                                                                                                          |
| --------------------- | ----------- | ------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Inferred instrument   | All         | Manual | Ensure that the inferred instrument and confidence matches the reported instrument by the lab (if available).        |
| Inferred read length  | All         | Manual | Ensure that the inferred read length (pre read trimming) matches the reported read length by the lab (if available). |

> | Inferred strandedness | RNA-seq     | Manual | Ensure that the inferred read length (pre read trimming) matches the reported read length by the lab (if available). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Inferred strandedness | RNA-seq     | Manual | Ensure that the inferred strandedness matches the reported strandedness by the lab (if available). |
```

#### fastq-screen

`fastq_screen` is used estimate the percentage of material derived from different sources (human, mouse, PhiX, etc).

### Automated metrics comparison

| Name                               | Produced By | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| ---------------------------------- | ----------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | % Aligned                          | [Samtools]  | Also known as mapping percentage, this indicator of quality, when high, verifies the mapping process/genome was correct and is consisitent with sample purity.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| % Aligned                          | [Samtools]  | Also known as mapping percentage, this indicator of quality, when high, verifies the mapping process/genome was correct and is consistent with sample purity.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
```

> | Per Base Sequence Quality          | [FastQC]    | The "Per Base Sequence Quality" module from FastQC shows the distribution of quality scores across all bases at each position in the reads. In our case, this is just to inform our end users -- the quality of the sequencing run has already been assessed by the lab upstream. So, there is no changing it at this point.                                                                              |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Per Base Sequence Quality          | [FastQC]    | The "Per Base Sequence Quality" module from FastQC shows the distribution of quality scores across all bases at each position in the reads. In our case, this is to inform our end users -- the quality of the sequencing run has already been assessed by the lab upstream.                                                                               |
```

| Overrepresented Sequences          | [FastQC]    | The "Overrepresented Sequences" module from FastQC displays sequences (at least 20bp) that occur in more than 0.1% of the total number of sequences and will help identify contamination (vector, adapter sequences, etc.).                                                                                                                                                                               |

> | Reads Genomic Origin               | [Qualimap]  | The "Reads Genomic Origin" from Qualimap determines how many alignments fall into exonic, intronic, and intergenic regions. Even if there is a high genomic mapping rate, it is necessary to check where the reads are being mapped. It should be verified that the mapping to intronic regions and exons are within acceptable ranges. Abnormal results could indicate issues such as DNA contamination. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Reads Genomic Origin               | [Qualimap]  | The "Reads Genomic Origin" from Qualimap determines how many alignments fall into exonic, intronic, and intergenic regions. Even if there is a high genomic mapping rate, it is necessary to check where the reads are mapped. It should be verified that the mapping to intronic regions and exons are within acceptable ranges. Abnormal results could indicate issues such as DNA contamination. |
```

| Strand Specificity                 | ngsderive   | Verification/sanity check of how reads were stranded for the RNA sequencing (stranded or unstranded protocol).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| GC Content Bias                    | ?           | GC profiles are typically remarkably stable. Even small/minor deviations could indicate a problem with the library used (or bacterial contamination).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

#### Thresholds and Metrics for Specific Applications

> To apply quality control metrics to vett data, we need reasonable thresholds that are practically acheivable and neither too lax or too strict. Our preference is for statistically or empirically determined thresholds rather than arbitrary estimates. By statistical thresholds, we are referring to distributional tests that formally define outliers. By empirical thresholds, we are referring to standards below which data analysis or interpretation are degraded. Statistical tests can be performed on large populations of QC data. We are already in postion to do that today. Empirical tests, however, require foreknowledge of the correct results. This requires experimental design and implementation through a laboratory at some cost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To apply quality control metrics to vet data, we need reasonable thresholds that are practically achievable and neither too lax nor too strict. Our preference is for statistically or empirically determined thresholds rather than arbitrary estimates. By statistical thresholds, we are referring to distributional tests that formally define outliers. By empirical thresholds, we are referring to standards below which data analysis or interpretation are degraded. Statistical tests can be performed on large populations of QC data. We are already in a position to do that today. Empirical tests, however, require foreknowledge of the correct results. This requires experimental design and implementation through a laboratory at some cost.
```

#### Metrics for WGS

> The quality metrics of special concern for WGS include depth of coverage and genomic regional coverage. Mapping quality is also critical. The analysis of whole genome sequencing to call variants depends on depth and sample purity. Accurate calls are made through replication and contamination creates false positives. So metrics that are sensitive to impurity are valuable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The quality metrics of special concern for WGS include depth of coverage and coverage distribution across genomic regions. Mapping quality is also critical. The analysis of whole genome sequencing to call variants depends on depth and sample purity. Accurate calls are made through replication and contamination creates false positives. So metrics that are sensitive to impurity are valuable.
```

#### Metrics for WES

> The quality metrics of special concern for WES include depth of coverage in exomic regions. Mapping quality, % mapped and duplication rate are also important.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The quality metrics of special concern for WES include depth of coverage in exonic regions. Mapping quality, mapping percentage, and duplication rate are also important.
```

#### Metrics for RNAseq

> The quality metrics of special concern for RNAseq include mapping percentage, percentage properly paired reads, and exomic regional coverage. Mapping quality is also critical.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The quality metrics of special concern for RNA-seq include mapping percentage, percentage properly paired reads, and exonic region coverage. Mapping quality is also critical.
```

## Specification

> These are generic instructions for running each of the tools in our pipeline. We run our pipeline in a series of QC scripts that are tailored for our compute cluster, so those commands may not apply elsewhere. Instead, we have supplied examples of the commands used in each package. Our default memory is 80G and we employ 4 threads for these processes.

Reviewer 2: Not sure. Each step takes a different configurable amount (I think the highest default is 50gb, but I override certain tasks as high 128gb). Similarly for threads, default is always 1 thread, the 2 QC tasks that can be multithreaded I override to 8.

> These are generic instructions for running each of the tools in our pipeline. We run our pipeline in a series of QC scripts that are tailored for our compute cluster, so those commands may not apply elsewhere. Instead we've supplied examples of the commands used to each package. Our default memory is 80G and we employ 4 threads for these processes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are generic instructions for running each of the tools in our pipeline. We run our pipeline in a series of QC scripts that are tailored for our compute cluster, so those commands may not apply elsewhere. Instead, we have supplied examples of the commands used in each package. Our default memory is 80G and we employ 4 threads for these processes.
```

### Dependencies

> We presume anaconda is available and installed. If not please follow the link to [anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com/) first.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We presume Anaconda is available and installed. If not, please follow the link to [Anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com/) first.
```

```bash
conda create --name bio-qc \
    --channel bioconda \
    --channel conda-forge \
    fastqc==0.11.8 \
    picard==2.20.2  \
    qualimap==2.2.2c \
    samtools==1.9 \
    fastq-screen==0.13.0 \
    ngsderive==1.1.0 \
    multiqc==1.9 \
    -y

conda activate bio-qc
```

> For linting created fastqs, `fqlib` must be installed. See installation instructions [here](https://github.com/stjude/fqlib)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For linting created fastqs, `fqlib` must be installed. See installation instructions [here](https://github.com/stjude/fqlib).
```

### Workflow

> The workflow specification is as follows. Note that some arguments that are not integral to the command (such as output directories) or arguments that can vary between compute environments (such as memory thresholds or number of threads) are not included.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The workflow specification is as follows. Note that arguments that are not integral to the command (such as output directories) or vary between compute environments (such as memory thresholds or number of threads) are not included.
```

1. Compute the md5 checksum of the file.

      ```bash
      md5sum $BAM
      ```

2. Use Picard's `ValidateSamFile` tool to ensure the inner contents of the BAM file are well-formed.

      ```bash
      picard ValidateSamFile \
          I=$BAM \                                        # specify bam file
          MODE=SUMMARY\                                   # concise output
          INDEX_VALIDATION_STRINGENCY=LESS_EXHAUSTIVE \   # lower stringency faster processing time
          IGNORE=INVALID_PLATFORM_VALUE                   # Validations to ignore.

>       ```

Reviewer 2: That has been removed in my recent [refactor of the validate step](https://github.com/stjudecloud/workflows/pull/52) (and the INDEX_VALIDATION_STRINGENCY argument has never been used).

      ```

7. Run `qualimap bamqc` to gather more in-depth statistics about read stats, coverage, mapping quality, mismatches, etc.

      ```bash
      qualimap bamqc -bam $BAM \          # bam filename
          -nt $NUM_THREADS \              # threads requested
          -nw 400                         # number of windows
      ```

8. If WGS or WES data, run `fastq_screen`. For performance, we subsample the input BAM using `samtools view -s $computed_fraction` before running it through `picard SamToFastq`. The resulting fastqs are validated with `fq lint` provided by `fqlib`.

      ```bash
      cat $fastq_1 $fastq_2 > $combined_fastq
         fastq_screen $combined_fastq
      ```

9. If RNA-seq, run `ngsderive strandedness` to determine a backwards-computed strandedness of the RNA-seq experiment.

      ```bash
      ngsderive strandedness
      ```

10. If RNA-seq data, run `qualimap rnaseq` to gather QC statistics that are tailored for RNA-seq files.

      ```bash
      qualimap rnaseq --java-mem-size=$MEM_SIZE \ # memory
         -bam $BAM \                              # bam filename
         -gtf $GTF_REF                            # transcript definition file

>          -pe                                      # specify paired end if paired end

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         [-pe]                                      # specify paired end if paired end
```

      ```

11. Combine all of the above metrics using `multiqc`.

      ```bash
      multiqc . # recurse all files in '.'
      ```

## Items Still In-Progress

> - [ ] Analysis tools for other types of sequencing (ChIP seq)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] Analysis tools for other types of sequencing (ChIP-seq)
```

- [ ] Useful metadata from various stages (sample collection, laboratory, pre-sequencing, sequencing, post-sequencing)

## Outstanding Questions

- What thresholds or metrics differentiate a poor-quality sample from a high-quality one?
- What other metrics or properties would be valuable?

> - What is best way to define and handle outliers?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- What is the best way to define and handle outliers?
```
